Stephen Cole Kleene (January 5, 1909 - January 25, 1994) was an
American mathematician. One of the students of Alonzo Church, Kleene,
along with Alan Turing, Emil Post, and others, is best known as a
founder of the branch of mathematical logic known as recursion theory,
which subsequently helped to provide the foundations of theoretical
computer science. Kleene's work grounds the study of which functions
are computable. A number of mathematical concepts are named after him:
Kleene hierarchy, Kleene algebra, the Kleene star (Kleene closure),
Kleene's recursion theorem and the Kleene fixpoint theorem. He also
invented regular expressions (also called, regular language), and made
significant contributions to the foundations of mathematical
intuitionism.

Although his last name is commonly pronounced klee-nee or kleen,
Kleene himself pronounced it klay-nee.  His son, Ken Kleene, wrote:
"As far as I am aware this pronunciation is incorrect in all known
languages. I believe that this novel pronunciation was invented by my
father."

*Biography*

Kleene was awarded the BA degree from Amherst College in 1930. He was
awarded the Ph.D. in mathematics from Princeton University in 1934.
His thesis, entitled _A Theory of Positive Integers in Formal Logic_,
was supervised by Alonzo Church. In the 1930s, he did important work
on Church's lambda calculus. In 1935, he joined the mathematics
department at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, where he spent
nearly all of his career. After two years as an instructor, he was
appointed assistant professor in 1937.

While a visiting scholar at the Institute for Advanced Study in
Princeton, 1939-40, he laid the foundation for recursion theory, an
area that would be his lifelong research interest. In 1941, he
returned to Amherst College, where he spent one year as an associate
professor of mathematics.

During World War II, Kleene was a lieutenant commander in the United
States Navy. He was an instructor of navigation at the U.S. Naval
Reserve's Midshipmen's School in New York, and then a project director
at the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, D.C.

In 1946, Kleene returned to Wisconsin, becoming a full professor in
1948 and the Cyrus C. MacDuffee professor of mathematics in 1964. He
was chair of the Department of Mathematics and Computer Science,
1962-63, and Dean of the College of Letters and Science from 1969
to 1974. The latter appointment he took on despite the considerable
student unrest of the day, stemming from the Vietnam War. He retired
from the University of Wisconsin in 1979. In 1999 the mathematics
library at the University of Wisconsin was renamed in his honor.

Kleene's teaching at Wisconsin resulted in three texts in mathematical
logic, Kleene (1952, 1967) and Kleene and Vesley (1965), often cited
and still in print. Kleene (1952) wrote alternative proofs to the
Gödel's incompleteness theorems that enhanced their canonical status
and made them easier to teach and understand. Kleene and Vesley (1965)
is the classic American introduction to intuitionist logic and
mathematics.

Kleene served as president of the Association for Symbolic Logic,
1956-58, and of the International Union of History and Philosophy of
Science, 1961. In 1990, he was awarded the National Medal of Science.

Kleene and his wife Nancy Elliott had four children. He had a lifelong
devotion to the family farm in Maine. An avid mountain climber, he had
a strong interest in nature and the environment, and was active in
many conservation causes.
